---
layout: category-post
title:  "IR Photography!"
date:   2020-04-19 12:20:56 -0400
categories: Random
---

During these strange Covid times, I've found myself drawn in to hobbies that have fallen a bit by the wayside, like photography. I'm staying with my parents at the moment and found an old SLR which I'm planning to use once I have the right batteries. Another thing I am experimenting with is digital infrared photography. 

# What is IR photography?

The human visual system is most sensitive to light in the 380 (violet) - 740 (red) nm range which makes up the visibile spectrum that we are able to see. Light with wavelengths just below this is in the ultraviolet (UV) range and light just above this is in the near infrared (IR) range. Since we only see in the visibile range, most digital camera sensors have an infrared filter which lets light in the visible spectrum pass through while filtering out light in the IR range, to best capture images in line with our visual system. Simply removing this filter allows more light to pass through to the sensor, allowing you to take some great photos that include this near-IR light! This can result in some truly beautiful and other-worldy landscapes where plants and green objects appear purple, for example, or another color of your choice post-processing. Modifying an everyday camera in this way does not let you have thermal "heat-vision" as that would fall into the domain of far-IR, a range which most consumer camera sensors are not sensitive to.

# Getting Started

You have a few options here.

1) If you are a serious photographer with a fancy dslr, you probably do not want to modify your sensor, and in this case, you can buy a filter that blocks light in the visible spectrum and allows light in the IR spectrum to pass. This is possible because the IR filter does not block 100% of IR light, but since you are applying another filter, not much remaining light will pass through to the sensor. You will then need some long exposeure times to get a usable image.
2) If you use film, get some IR sensitive film, as simple as that.
3) If you have an old digital camera such as a point and shoot or obsolete cell phone, you can take it apart and remove the filter. This is the path that I chose.

# Camera Modification

The first step was finding a suitable camera to modify. I have an old point and shoot that still takes pictures, but the lcd screen is completely busted so I scrapped this idea. I then looked around for some old smartphones. I found an LG G3 from 2014 with a questionable battery that seemed to have a good balance between not worth anything (in the event of destroying it) and decent camera (13 MP Sony Exmor IMX135, 1/3.06 in[1] OIS+, F2.4). It also has an IR blaster for focusing the camera which allows it to have some night-vision capabilites that I'll showcase later!

YouTube was a great source of information here and I followed some tutorials for similar phones to get this phone apart and remove the filter (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aTo7g1O-2AE&t=449s). Since I am stuck at home, I didn't have all of the equipment to cleanly remove the sensor (I used a hair dryer as a heat gun to little effect). Eventually I got the filter out with an exacto knife and some force and put the phone back together. I did scrape the sensor a bit so all of my photos have some artifacts which actually look cool and give them some more character, but not ideal!

# Taking Pictures

Upon getting the phone back together, I found that removing the filter affected the focus point of the camera, essentially turning it into a macro only lens. This is fine, and I took some macro shots, but I really wanted to use to capture some spring landscapes with green foliage. If you plan ahead and have the materials, you can replace the filter with an equivalent piece of glass to preserve the focusing capabilities. You can also replace it with some old film to block out some of the visible light leaving it as more of an IR specific camera. I didn't want to do these things so I decided to try to retrofit another lens onto the phone. I found my old IPhone 6 telephoto lens which I used in the past while I was traveling in Asia and bent a coat hanger to make a rough mount for the G3. While a bit cumbersome, with some careful and patient aligning, I was able to take some pictures while out on a walk with my mom and dog. Another thing that I experimented with was adding some colored filters between the phones external lens and the telephoto. These came from an old flashlight. Doubling the red and blue lenses seemed to have the effect of blocking out most visible light. 

# Editing Pictures

Those pictures were cool, but I have to admit, the original images did not look that interesting straight out of the camera! There are a number of tutorials on youtube about how to do this lhttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZMPWtK8aZaw using Adobe Photoshop and Lightroom. Fortunately, both of these software suites are availabe for free to many students during this lockdown so I was able to use them again. Without getting into the details, the typical processing chain is to: apply a color profile, white balance, swap the red and blue color channels, then do whatever creative effects you desire. 

# Night Vision

A cool bonus of modifying this camera was the ability to see in the dark! As mentioned before, the G3 uses IR light for auto focus and has an IR blaster which constantly flashes while the camera is on. In a completely pitch dark room, opening the camera app and looking at the screen of the phone lets me see as the IR flashes illuminate the space. One downside of this is that since it always flashes, it can interfere with some normal photographs but the light can be covered up or probably deactivated somehow. 

# Next Steps

I have a pretty decent Sony point and shoot camera up in Boston and I'm considering modifiying it for IR when I get the chance as current cellphones take far better images these days (excluding optical zoom capability, for now..). The only concerns I have are 1) cleanly removing the filter, and 2) replacing the filter with some similiar glass to ensure that it can still autofocus. If I'm able to do that I'll be sure to post the results. If anyone ever reads this, hope it was useful/interesting!